# Applied Data Science Final Project: Examining Complaints of Syringe Litter in NYC

In this project, I aimed to investigate the factors contributing to syringe-related complaints in New York City. I found that the proportion of syringe complaints follows a seasonal trend, with complaints peaking in summer and declining in winter, perhaps due to changes in outdoor activity and visibility of litter.

I also analyzed the geographic distribution of syringe complaints and found that they are most concentrated in Manhattan, whereas the highest availability of sharps drop-off sites is found in the Bronx and Brooklyn. This implies that establishing more drop-off sites in Manhattan could help reduce the syringe complaints.

Syringe complaints are also correlated with complaints about encampments, panhandling, and squeegeeing (unwanted window-washing for money). These complaint categories had the highest coefficients in the elastic net regression model I built to predict neighborhood-level syringe complaints. However, while the model achieved an R2 of 0.75 on the test set, it only had an R2 of 0.34 on the validation set. This may be due to the validation set having more values in the middle of the range, which the model struggled to predict accurately. Nonetheless, the model provided further evidence that syringe complaints are related to other complaint categories.

Another important finding is that syringe complaints are not strongly negatively correlated with the availability of sharps drop-off sites. One possible explanation is that there are other barriers preventing residents from using drop-off sites. For example, residents are supposed to deliver their sharps in a puncture-resistant container, which may be difficult or impractical. Another explanation is that syringe complaints do not reflect the amount of syringe litter but rather residents' attitudes towards it. However, I did not find a strong correlation between syringe complaints and the socioeconomic factors that I included in my analysis. Therefore, more data is needed to understand the patterns in syringe complaints.

There are several approaches I would like to explore in future work. First, I would like to include additional datasets that could help explain the variation in 311 complaints, such as pedestrian foot traffic, proximity to university campuses, or availability of substance abuse treatment centers. Second, I would like to try reframing the analysis as a classification problem rather than a regression problem. One way I could do this is by dividing each neighborhood tabulation area into smaller sections and predicting whether or not a syringe complaint occurs in each one. Finally, I would like to explore a spatial regression model, which would account for the geographic relationships among the neighborhood tabulation areas and complaints. Together, these future approaches may provide further insights into the factors driving syringe complaints in New York City.
